Dan review (#2)
aguoietf/merged-ietf-ccamp-wdm-tunnel-yang: draft-bgk-ccamp-merged-wdm-tunnel.md

--- abstract

   This document defines a YANG model for managing optical tunnels (media-channels),

>    complementing the information provided by the multi-technology optical topology model.

Reviewer: This merged model covers also WSON tunnels.

Looking at the abstract of [draft-ietf-teas-yang-te-34](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-teas-yang-te-34) and [draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-path-computation-yang-02](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-path-computation-yang-02), what about the following abstract:

```suggestion
This document defines a YANG data model for the provisioning and management of Traffic Engineering (TE) tunnels and Label Switched Paths (LSPs) in Optical Networks (Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSON) and Flexi-Grid Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) Networks).
```

If we agree on this abstract, we can open an issue to align the abstract in [draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-path-computation-yang-02](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-path-computation-yang-02)

   The YANG data model defined in this document conforms to the Network
   Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

--- middle

# Introduction

Transport networks have evolved from current DWDM systems towards elastic optical networks,

> based on flexi-grid transmission and switching technologies {{!RFC7698}}. Such technology aims

Reviewer: If they have evolved it would be not from 'current' but from 'previous' or 'traditional'

Moreover, RFC7698 is Informational so better to make it an informational reference to avoid Downref nits

```suggestion
Transport networks have evolved from traditional Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSON) systems {{?RFC6163}} towards elastic optical networks,
based on flexi-grid Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) transmission and switching technologies {{?RFC7698}}. Such technology aims
```

at increasing transport network scalability and flexibility, allowing bandwidth usage optimization.

> While {{!I-D.ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-yang}} focuses on flexi-grid objects such as nodes, transponders

Reviewer: I would also mention RFC9094 since this draft is covering WSON and flexi-grid tunnels:

```suggestion
While {{!RFC9094}} {{!I-D.ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-yang}} focus on flexi-grid objects such as nodes, transponders
```

> and links, this document presents a YANG {{!RFC7950}} model for the flexi-grid tunnel (media-channel).

Reviewer: Aligned with the abstract to clarify that we are managing both WSON and flexi-grid tunnels

```suggestion
and links, this document presents a YANG {{!RFC7950}} model for the provisioning and management of Traffic Engineering (TE) tunnels and Label Switched Paths (LSPs) in Optical Networks, which can be Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSON) networks or Flexi-Grid Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) Networks or a mix of these two Networks.
```

This YANG module defines the path from a source transponder or node to the destination through several
intermediate nodes in the flexi-grid network.

This document identifies the flexi-grid tunnel components, parameters and their values, and

> characterizes the features and the performances of the flexi-grid elements. An application example is

Reviewer: Better to use WDM instead of flexi-grid:

```suggestion
This document identifies the WDM tunnel components, parameters and their values, and
characterizes the features and the performances of the WDM elements. An application example is
```

   -  other optical attributes

> Each path can be a tunnel (only defined by the source and destination node)
> or a network tunnel (additionally needs source and destination transponders).

Reviewer: I think that the terminology in draft-ietf-teas-yang-te distinguishes between end-to-end and segment:

```suggestion
Each path can be a segment path (only defined by the source and destination nodes or link termination points)
or an end-to-end path (additionally needs source and destination transponders).
```
